---
wp_id: 3107
imgId: 3108
videoId: ""
imgSrc: /assets/thumbnails/3108.webp
lang: en
title: "Vaccinations, passports and government mandates: how to deal with it all?"
pubDate: 2021-09-29T10:00:57
tags: ["aa"]
---

<!-- page: 6 -->

<p>In recent history, I personally have not seen a more divisive topic than COVID. Even within each Christian tradition, we see lack of peace and division regarding the virus, vaccinations and the mandated passports. In this video, I will reluctantly share my thoughts, which are based on Scripture, with the hopes that, as Christians, we are able to peacefully dialogue. I believe everyone is entitled to their opinion and, as a clergy member, I am not an exception. Though, for me, it is more than a question of opinion, it is also a responsibility in front of God. I pray that this video does not allow the devil to steal your inner peace. Let us pray together to our One Trinitarian God to bring peace into this broken world.</p>
<p>First, we must ask ourselves what is the basis of our opinion? Is it science? Is it a literalistic or scientific understanding of Scripture based on personal comprehension? Are my political affiliations in anyway influencing my opinion on the subject? In any case, the most popular opinions are at two polar extremes. On one side, we find those who completely rely on science. Pretty much making it a god. Now, if you know me at all, you know how I respect science and tend to be extremely analytical. However, I also understand very well that God is the Ultimate Scientist. He is also the Ultimate Healer. Science is merely a tool. God is the One in Whom I have faith—not in science. On the other extreme, we have those who read Scripture literally, and often scientifically, without a full systematic understanding of it. They would say that this specific vaccine is the mark of the beast and that the government is implanting in us a chip, or something of the like, as a way to control us. I do not believe that this an accurate understanding of Scripture.</p>
<p>So what is it that Scripture conveys? First, that humanity has given over this world to the devil. Like St. John teaches us in his first epistle: “We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies under the<em> sway of</em> the wicked one.” From the beginning of creation, humanity has been continually eating from the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Essentially telling God, we are our own source of knowledge, we want to be our own source of life and morality. We want independency from you. But, this has deep consequences on the human condition. Without the Source of Light, darkness has creeped in and corruption took over. In the last few years, we have seen humanity diving nose first in blasphemy and profanity. Should we just pretend that everything is ok? In discussing the end times, Matthew 24 says: “because lawlessness will abound the love of many will grow cold but He who endures to the end shall be saved.” Christ also says: “…when the Son of Man comes, will He really find faith on the earth?” implying that there will be barely any faith. This process of apostasy has been ongoing for a while but has been accentuated in the last few months. It is very possible that the beginning of the end has begun. Is it tomorrow or in a hundred years? Only God knows. In all circumstances, we have to be watchful. Unfortunately, some adopt an attitude of laxness or denial towards this subject. History just repeats itself some say. Well, that’s true, but history must end one day.  And this time around there are many signs, on a global level, that fit the description of the end of times as described in Scripture. I understand that no one wants to hear that it is the beginning of the end. I would rather not hear it myself. But in all cases, laxity is not an option. We must watch!</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>Personally, I believe that COVID is truly the work of the devil. I believe, it is a real disease which requires a real solution. I do, also, assume that scientists have honestly done their work to produce an effective vaccine. And if the vaccine does reduce the spread of the virus, then it would be a very Trinitarian thing to take it for the sake of the other because I have a duty towards my neighbor. However, in no way would I agree with the type of control the different governments around the world are currently implementing. That kind of power and control belongs only to God; and yet, He chooses not to use it. He is not a dictator. He is Almighty, but He is also Love and therefore gives everyone a free will. No one person or group of people are meant to have that kind of ultimate control. Perhaps, you might be ok with this kind of control in this specific case because it suits your position. But it would be imprudent to believe that it will end there. This kind of control is especially worrisome because the book of the Apocalypse does associate the figure of the Antichrist with the government. The Apocalypse is both historical to the first-century Church and prophetic to the end of times. At the time, the Roman government was persecuting Christians, and it is only a matter of time for history to repeat itself.  For more on that specific subject, I encourage you to watch the video “How will the end of the world be” – link is in the description box. Also, why do some trust the government that blindly? Isn’t it enough that they have removed Christian thought from school systems and are brainwashing children with atheistic notions and depraved morality. Why should I put my faith in an atheistic government that undermines my God? No, no… My faith is in God. And, He says that each has a free will. It is a head-scratcher that Christians who are having trouble submitting their own wills to God; yet, are ok to allow the atheistic government to enforce their will on others—even on basic necessities, like work.</p>
<p>Especially when we are told from the book of Apocalypse that the Church will be exiled or maybe even illegal. It says: “Now when the thousand years have expired, Satan will be released from his prison <sup>8 </sup>and will go out to deceive the nations which are in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle, whose number <em>is</em> as the sand of the sea. <sup>9 </sup>They went up on the breadth of the earth and surrounded the camp of the saints and the beloved city.” Here, is a picture of the ungodly who are hostile against the Church. They are represented through the Old Testament types of Gog and Magog. They surround the camp of the saints and the beloved city—The Church. Similarly, in Daniel chapter 12, it says the following discussing the end times: “7 Then I heard the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand to heaven, and swore by Him who lives forever, that it shall be for a time, times, and half a time; and when the power of the holy people has been completely shattered, all these things shall be finished.” The power of the holy people will be shattered. When the ungodly, who will become the majority, will be against the Church, what will the Church do? True Christians will always find a way to continue worshipping even if it means to relocate to remote areas to do so. No wonder that the book of the Apocalypse speaks about the flight of the Church. It says: “13 Now when the dragon saw that he had been cast to the earth, he persecuted the woman who gave birth to the male Child. 14 But the woman was given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness to her place, where she is nourished for a time and times and half a time, from the presence of the serpent.” But what would be the decisive factor for this flight to occur? What do you think would happen if the government made the Eucharist illegal in certain populated areas to mitigate the spread of the virus? Do you think this is far-fetched? Yeah, perhaps for today. But what if ‘science’ incrementally dictated that the spread of a certain uncontrolled variant was partially due to places of worship including the distribution of the Eucharist? What if the current vaccines are not able to protect against a certain variant and we find ourselves back to square one? What if we overcome this virus but another one surfaces later and we are again where we started? What if the Church has to wait another 3 to 5 years to allow her members to once again regularly partake of the Eucharist? What if we are still having this discussion in a decade or two from now, will it still be far-fetched?</p>
<p>Again, in the book of Daniel chapter 12, it reads the following: “11  And from the time that the daily sacrifice is taken away, and the abomination of desolation is set up, there shall be one thousand two hundred and ninety days.” Here, the Old Testament daily sacrifices were taken away and this literally transpired during the time of Antiochus and the Maccabees. But, as you know, prophecies have many fulfilments. On this, St. Jerome says: “From this circumstance it is apparent that the three and a half years are spoken of in connection with the time of the antichrist, for he is going to persecute the saints for three and a half years, or 1,290 days, and then he shall meet his fall on the famous, holy mountain. And so from the time of the removal of the continual sacrifice, namely, the time when the antichrist shall obtain possession of the world and forbid the worship of God [Eucharist], unto the day of his death, the three and a half years, or 1,290 days, shall be fulfilled.” It is a real possibility that during the end of times the Eucharist will not be legal—or will be legal as long as it is done in remote areas, and therefore, the flight of the Church.</p>
<p>But how would the devil who uses inclusivity as a façade target specific people like Christians? I used to wonder prior to COVID, how would the devil cunningly devise a plan that would ultimately prohibit Christians from buying or selling without the mark of the beast as it says in the Apocalypse of St. John. Now, it seems, the perfect set up is in place. There is a real sickness. A real problem. It is the perfect excuse for him to maneuver freely. Some argue that this is not a specific attack on Christians. Of course, it is not advertised as such. He is much more cunning and deceitful than that. The forefront of the attack will not be directly on Christians. However, the destruction of the Church is his ultimate goal. Christians are his enemies. This is an art that he has perfected. He will even make Christians look as the unreasonable ones in the process.</p>
<p>So, Scripture tells us that at the end of times there will be massive apostasy which is happening in front of our eyes. It also says that Christians will not be able to buy and sell which the perfect set up is currently in place or being developed. Scripture tells us that the government will be persecuting the Church at the end times. This is happening already on a moral level and we know the physical is to come as the Church will have to flee to remote areas to partake of the Eucharist. All of this is in the process. But the one thing the government has already clearly accomplished is the declaration that the Church is non-essential. And, again, it’s happening in front of our eyes. Churches, along with other worship places, have been equated with cinemas, bars, amusement parks and so on. The Church, where we find true life has been declared non-essential! Family and psychological problems are through the roof everywhere and, ironically, the government has cut us off from the Source of healing Himself. I believe that these are steppingstones towards the end. Regardless, if it happens in our lifetime or not, one thing is for sure, we ought to be watchful. The real question will become “what will I choose between being a regular member of the workforce in the so-called normal society who believes in science or a member of the Body of Christ through partaking of the Eucharist?&#8221; What will you choose if this happens in your lifetime? In that light, how can a Christian be comfortable with the government to take on such control?</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
